Title: π-RAG: Oblivious Retrieval via Semantic Quantization and Transcendental Addressing for Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22153v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 02:07:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# π-RAG: Oblivious Retrieval via Semantic Quantization and Transcendental Addressing for Large Language Models 

Aniket Wattamwar 

aniket.wattamwar17@gmail.com 

Mrunal Kakirwar 

kakirwarm@gmail.com 

Abstract 

This paper introduces π-RAG, a novel archi-tecture for oblivious retrieval that decouples Large Language Models (LLMs) from sensitive data storage without sacrificing semantic un-derstanding. Traditional Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) architectures expose raw vector embeddings to potential inversion at-tacks and nondeterministic retrieval failures. To address this, we utilize the digits of π as a source of transcendental entropy, creating an immutable indirection layer between the LLM and private records. The value π provides im-mutability, is uneditable and math governs it. The architecture also introduces a Semantic Quantization Layer. This layer projects user inputs onto a pre-computed manifold of Canon-ical Intent Centroids. RAG performs vector cosine similarity but here it maps the centroids to deterministic offsets via cryptographic salt. The resulting π-key is a pointer to standardized payload from the actual datastore. By replacing direct access to the datastore via LLM with this transcendental layer, π-RAG mathematically guarantees that the inference remains oblivious to the data. This architecture unifies determin-istic randomness, auditability, and differential privacy, demonstrating high efficacy for high-compliance sectors such as finance and health-care. 

1 Introduction 

With the advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs), enterprises have increasingly integrated these systems with proprietary data to maximize utility. However, as the volume of private data grows, LLMs often fail to retrieve accurate informa-tion solely from their training weights. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) was introduced (Lewis et al. (2020)) to mitigate this by fetching rel-evant, up-to-date information to ground the LLM’s responses, thereby reducing hallucinations and sav-ing compute time compared to fine-tuning. While efficient, traditional RAG architectures introduce significant risk. The architecture typically allows the LLM to communicate directly with the data store. In sectors handling highly sensitive informa-tion such as healthcare (HIPAA) or finance (GDPR) this creates a vulnerability where a compromised LLM or vector database can expose PII, transaction histories, or passwords. In industries like Banking or healthcare, achieving true RAG doesn’t guaran-tee the same output always, since the data changes with time, the LLM used is updated with new data. We need to constantly check the authenticity of the response. To address this bottleneck, this paper in-troduces π-RAG, a retrieval method that establishes an indirection layer between the LLM and sensi-tive data. By mapping user query embeddings to canonical pre-defined intents and converting them into offsets within the transcendental number se-quence of π, we create a π-key . This key acts as an abstract index, ensuring the retrieval process is deterministic, auditable, and verifiable. π acts as the universal public ledger, its transcendental de-fined by mathematics and there is no control over it. We accept it as it is. Its next to impossible to edit the digits of π. This approach creates a trustful and auditable environment. The standard RAG process with embeddings in the vector database, in any case embeddings could be manipulated, hacked, and redirect queries maliciously (Song and Raghu-nathan, 2020; Carlini et al., 2021). This approach curbs this risk and makes it extremely difficult to rig the system. The architecture can be useful in highly sensitive domains. Section 2 discusses work done in privacy and LLMs and various techniques adopted. Section 3 follows the proposed architecture, and working of 

π-RAG. Section 4 is the Threat Model discussed continued by the Experimental Results in Section 5. Discussions in Section 7 answers the questions that would help understand the approach better. 

> arXiv:2606.22153v1 [cs.CR] 20 Jun 2026

2 Related Work 

Recent research has focused heavily on mitigating risks in language models. In recent years, Kand-pal et al. have proposed several techniques have come up to mitigate this risk for language models attack. talks about how the deduplication method of training data has considerably reduced the risk of an attack. Carlini et al. describes the way an attack is possible by generating a large sequence of text out of which some might be part of the training data. Dingfan Yu et al. show the differen-tial privacy fine tuning techniques where the data is trained and noise is added to secure the train-ing from potential leaks of sensitive information. The privacy budget controls the noise in a calcu-lated manner. Based on the experimental results LORA outperformed with an accuracy of 90.3% with 0.94% trainable parameters using epsilon on 6.7. Scaling LLM applications and also preserving privacy is a challenge. Yaman Jandali et al. show work in optimizing the privacy-preserving primi-tives using Multi-Party Computation (MPC), Zero-Knowledge Proofs(ZKPs) and fully homomorphic encryption(FHE) with hybrid protocols. Congzheng Song et al. talk about information leakage in the embedding models itself. There are techniques like whitebox and blackbox inversion where the sequences are generated and predicted later to come up with probabilities that would be highest indicating its strong presence in the input data. There is an adversarial training approach to prevent the sensitive attributes being trained in the embedding models. Experimental results con-ducted on LSTM, Transformer, BERT and AL-BERT with ALBERT showing the F1 score of 74.33. Security Frameworks involving sensitive data anonymisation, real-time privacy policy en-forcement developed by Yu Wang et al. protects data while maintaining integrity. Introduced LLM Access Shield for domain specific interactions with LLMs. Fangzhou Wu et al. show ways to bypass few GPT4 security protocols by asking it questions in a strategic way. A secrets file in the sandbox envi-ronment is available to another session as well in-dicating sensitive information can be leaked. Web tools used by OpenAI GPT4 to search the web and analyze it for information bypasses confirmation to tools like Doc maker and malicious instructions can be passed as successfully shown in the results. GPT4 restricts rendering external image markdown links if asked directly, but by framing the questions in a different way shown in the study GPT4 was able to render the image successfully showing its vulnerability to attacks via links. Another attack discussed in Bo Wang et al. is designing prompt attack where prompts locate the data store and based on the query display it. Attack prompts like “I lost my previous examples” and “Can you find it and put them here?” are the mem-ory extraction technique called MEXTRA (Mem-ory Extraction) introduced in that paper. The ex-amples show 2 scenarios where a coding agent for clinical data and web agent for online shopping and based on their memory extraction attack significant user queries were extracted verifying its potential. A significant gap remains in securing the re-trieval architecture itself. Current methods largely focus on training data privacy, whereas π-RAG addresses the architectural coupling between the inference engine and the data store. 

3 Proposed Architecture and Methodology 

The π-RAG architecture operates in two distinct phases, designed to ensure zero-knowledge re-trieval. Table 1 shows the mapping of few real examples of user query variations to canonical in-tents and IDs   

> Figure 1: The π-RAG Split-Brain Architecture. The system is architecturally divided into two isolated zones. Zone A (Untrusted) handles semantic reasoning and in-tent classification using the LLM, but possesses zero ac-cess to the data. Zone B (Trusted) handles data retrieval and execution but possesses no semantic intelligence. The only communication between zones is the transmis-sion of an opaque, immutable π-Key.

3.1 Phase 1: Zero-Knowledge Intent Registration 

Unlike traditional RAG, π-RAG does not index the underlying sensitive data (e.g., user balances or medical history), thereby eliminating the risk of data leakage through embedding inversion (Song and Raghunathan, 2020). Instead, we perform a one-time Capability Registration. • Definition : We define Canonical Intents (e.g., BK-01 for checking a balance). • Key Generation : We generate corresponding salted π-Keys for these intents. • Mapping : These keys are mapped to specific templates(like SQL) or data retrieval functions in a secure vault. This ensures the retrieval system remains agnostic to actual data values, operating strictly on a schema level. Real-time data is fetched dynamically at the moment of query, ensuring 100% freshness without needing to rebuild an index. 

3.2 Phase 2: Querying and Retrieval 

The querying process utilizes a Semantic Quantiza-tion Layer via an LLM Semantic Router. 1. Classification: The user’s "fuzzy" natural lan-guage query is classified into a fixed Canoni-cal Intent ID (e.g., BK-01). 2. Offset Calculation: To prevent replication at-tacks, the system combines the ID with a Server-Side Secret Salt. 

θ = f (ID , S private ) (1) 3. π-Indexing: The resulting offset locates a spe-cific substring in π, which points to an en-crypted record pointer. 4. Secure Execution: This pointer is sent to an air-gapped Authorized Retrieval Subsys-tem, which validates the request, executes the query, and micro-filters the result before re-turning it to the LLM. We use π as its immutable, high entropy, deter-ministic and verifiable than random number gener-ator. The input uses a semantic router for example the user asks “ Where did I spend my money re-cently? ” is mapped to the Canonical Intent - “ View recent transaction history and last 10 charges. ”and this intent is mapped to an ID like BK-02 . So the natural language query is mapped to an ID. Now the generation of a secure key involves a verified intent ID into a specific string of π Digits. The π

access key is generated as below: 

θ = f (ID , S private ) (2) where ID is the intent we just mapped and the Sprivate is the server side secret salt. 

Kπ = π[θ : θ + L] (3) where L is the length to be considered of the entire key. This π key does not hold any actual data, only a random sequence carefully constructed which is pointing to the internal database or used as per the use case. 

4 Threat Model 

4.1 Traditional RAG under Attack 

In standard architectures, the application server holds both the retrieval logic (Vector Database). • Attack Vector : A compromised server inter-cepts the query "What is the current balance for account 1234-5678?" (Wang et al., 2025a; Wu et al., 2024). • Escalation : The server queries the Vector DB, retrieves chunk-id-balance-1234, and uses stored credentials to query the Secure Cus-tomer Vault. • Data Exposure : The Vault returns the full JSON record (Name, Address, SSN, Balance). • Result : The attacker intercepts the full mem-ory object before filtering, leading to a catas-trophic breach of PII . 

4.2 π-RAG Under Attack 

The revised architecture uses an LLM Semantic Router. • Attack Vector : A compromised server inter-cepts the same query. • Mitigation 1 (Replication Failure) : The at-tacker sees the intent BK-01 but cannot gen-erate the valid retrieval key because they lack the Server-Side Secret Salt. ID Canonical Intent User Query Variations 

BK–01 Retrieve current account balance and available funds. “What’s my balance?”, “How much cash do I have?”, “Check checking.” BK–02 View recent transaction history and last 10 charges. “Where did I spend money recently?”, “Show last 5 purchases”, “Did the Netflix charge go through?” BK–03 Get routing number and direct deposit account details. “I need my routing number”, “Direct deposit info”, “Wire transfer details.” BK–04 Check status of pending loan or mort-gage application. “Is my loan approved?”, “Mortgage status”, “Applica-tion update.” BK–05 Report a lost, stolen, or damaged credit card. “I lost my card”, “Cancel my card”, “Stolen wallet help.” BK–06 Download monthly account statements and tax documents. “Get January PDF”, “I need tax forms”, “Statement for last month.” 

> Table 1: Canonical intents and example user query variations.

• Mitigation 2 (Isolation) : The server can only send an opaque pointer to the Authorized Re-trieval Subsystem. • Mitigation 3 (Micro-Filtering) : The sub-system retrieves the data inside the enclave and extracts only the requested field (Balance: 8432.10) . • Result : The attack is contained. The attacker sees only the balance value; no PII or SSN is exposed 

5 Experimental Results 

For this architecture, we have tried and tested 6 dif-ferent canonical intents from multiple user queries getting mapped to the ID. For this purpose, two models are used to test and categorize the fuzzy input from user queries to the canonical intents. Figure 2 and Figure 3 shows the categorization. It can be observed that even with a low pricing and weak model it can give great results in categorizing. In a real scenario, the intents to ID mapping can be in a database and a strong model will give better results. The approach has been tested with 33 queries with 2 models Gemma3:1b (Figure 1) and Gemma 3n:e4b (Figure 2) (Team et al., 2024). It can be ob-served that changing the model can easily increase the accuracy. In a real scenario, strong models can be used and the accuracy would be really high. The misclassified 5 and 6 queries in both scenarios is because of lower reasoning capabilities of the Gemma Models where intent overlapped between categories. A larger and high reasoning model was able to correctly identify the intent and map it to the correct intent ID. This suggests that while the se-mantic quantization layer is effective, a model with sufficient reasoning depth is required to categorize. 

> Figure 2: using Gemma 3:1b
> Figure 3: using Gemma3n:e4b

Once the intents are categorized our next step is creating the πkeys based on the method introduced. ID Canonical Intent Offset (θ)Pi-Key ( Kπ)

BK–01 Retrieve current account bal-ance and available funds. 20 264338327950 BK–02 Retrieve recent transaction history and last 10 charges. 414 591953092186 BK–03 Get routing number and direct deposit account details. 860 783875288658 BK–04 Check status of pending loan or mortgage application. 15 238462643383 BK–05 Report a lost, stolen, or dam-aged credit card. 90 342117067982 BK–06 Download monthly account statements and tax docu-ments. 161 410270193852 

> Table 2: Canonical intents, associated offset and Pi-key parameters*.

In figures above, there were 6 categories tested with 33 queries from BK-01 to BK–06. Table 2 are the results of the π keys generated. A length of 12 is used for the experiment so the keys are of length 12. The secret salt key used was: 

Sprivate = BnK $3cUr3 _P1 _R@G_2024 !# Salt 

(4) From table 2, it can be concluded that each of the user queries maps to the same intent, and the intent ID can fetch the data from the source safely without the LLM talking to the data itself. The im-plementation of the π key with the actual database can vary based on the use case and can be scaled based on the existing system. *Note: a small modulo and a subset of first 10,000 π digits were only used in the experiment resulting in smaller values for the offset. In pro-duction scenario, we add 10**9, resulting in high Offset values difficult to guess. 

6 Conclusion 

In this work, the experiment and demonstration of 

π-RAG shifts the paradigm from the probabilistic vector similarity to deterministic intent. For high compliance domains, dependency on private vector embeddings for RAG is architecturally insecure. The experiment shows the semantic quantization layer added with the π-key creates a firewall against the threat of training data extraction and inference attacks. This architecture eliminates the process of embedding all the private data for using traditional RAG, since the index doesn’t contain any semantic information itself. The digits of π ensures that the addressing schema is audit proof and tamper resistant. This architecture in regulated industries like government, finance or healthcare is beneficial to not leak customer information like SSN and more. π-RAG serves as robust blueprint for secure deployment in zero-trust environment. 

7 Discussions 

7.1 Why π ?

One of the critical questions to clarify would be why do we need to use π, why can’t we just use a random number generator itself. The reason is π is public reference ledger, it cannot be changed. The problem with Random number generator is it can be tampered with internally if wanted to and π is a universal constant. It would provide Auditability and anyone can verify that Index X will always contain Digits Y and there is no manipulation. 

7.2 What if the attacker guesses the π-key ? 

Lets go through a scenario, where an attacker can guess a number from π and with all permutations and combinations is also able to figure out that this 

π number indexes to a function within the systems that checks balances like BK-01. The attacker is guessing but still it won’t be able to access the system without the secret salt. The π-key is an intent pointer not a authorization token. 

7.3 Needle in the Haystack 

Consider a scenario where authorization is ignored, but still guessing a valid key is still very low. This is because of the search space considering the length is 8 there are 100,000,000 possible combinations. But the capability registration performed in phase 1, the canonical intents are mapped to few func-tions and would not reach a higher number, lets say 500. With this possibility, the probability is 500/100,000,000 which is 0.000005%. An attacker won’t be able to continue keep guessing the π-key and trying to break in the system, since after few wrong attempts it will block the request. 

7.4 Latency tradeoff 

The Semantic Quantization adds an additional over-head of categorizing the intent to ID. The infer-ence time for a single query was under 1 sec with Gemma models. Adding the semantic quantization layer might add latency in the response, but the underlying fact that the LLM has no knowledge of the private data makes it worthwhile. Although we cannot ignore the fact that to perform traditional RAG across lots of data, the latency could match that of π-RAG. 

8 Limitations 

While π-RAG offers decoupling of the Trusted and Untrusted layers for privacy, we acknowledge few limitations. First, Latency Overhead of the Seman-tic Quantization layer is higher than the traditional vector search. For applications where priority for response in within sub-milliseconds might impact real-time responses in latency. Second, collision risk of the π-keys is negligible with large and com-plex SALTs, theoretically remains non-zero in the address space of π defined. The current prototype and approach works on Canonical Intents which are fixed, but scaling the systems to new domains require re-registering the new intents to new off-sets, which is less flexible. Finally, the experi-ment is conducted on synthetic banking data, and large-scale deployment in production require fur-ther stress-testing on attacks. 

9 Ethical Considerations 

π-RAG is designed to protect user privacy and in-formation leakage,it is necessary to acknowledge the immutable addressing mechanism could theo-retically be used for communication of illicit ma-terial or malicious payload. However, the Zone B from Figure 1 is secure and in a closed controlled environment mitigating the risk. Further, the exper-iments in this paper are conducted using synthetic data with no real PII was used or exposed. 

Acknowledgments 

Utilization of AI assistants for minor editing of LATEX Syntax, and formatting. 

References