Title: Advancing the State-of-the-Art in Empirical Privacy Auditing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.10481v1

Published Time: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 00:38:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Advancing the State-of-the-Art in Empirical Privacy Auditing 

Nicole Mitchell ∗

Google Research San Francisco, CA 

nicolemitchell@google.com 

Galen Andrew ∗

Google Research Seattle, WA 

galenandrew@google.com 

Arun Ganesh 

Google Research Seattle, WA 

arunganesh@google.com 

Brendan McMahan 

Google Research Seattle, WA 

mcmahan@google.com 

Peter Kairouz 

Google Research Seattle, WA 

kairouz@google.com 

Abstract 

Parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large lan-guage models (LLMs) can exhibit problem-atic memorization of individual training ex-amples. Empirical privacy auditing (EPA) quantifies this risk by measuring realistic data leakage on membership inference (MI) or reconstruction attacks. A key challenge in EPA is designing “canary” examples that are mixed with the privacy-sensitive training data. We propose generating syn-thetic canaries via high-temperature sam-pling ( T ≥ 0.8) from LLMs, using prompts tailored to the privacy-sensitive training data. These canaries act as high-influence outliers, ensuring high identifiability and hence strong audits. Further, since the ca-naries are themselves non-private, they are inspectable and can be inserted with repe-tition without jeopardizing the privacy of the real data. An important use of mod-els fine-tuned on privacy-sensitive data is the generation of synthetic data. This also comes with privacy risk. We intro-duce a powerful synthetic data audit based on fine-tuning an auxiliary model on the synthetic data. Auditing the auxiliary model for the original canaries then pro-vides a strong estimate of the privacy leak-age through the synthetic data. Finally, leveraging our strong auditing methodolo-gies, we perform a systematic investigation into the interacting effects of model capac-ity and canary entropy on memorization.      

> ∗NM was primarily responsible for experiments, analysis, and presentation of results. GA was primarily responsible for conceiving of the synthetic canary de-sign and the LLM-based data audit, and paper writing. Both contributed to implementation.

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increas-ingly fine-tuned on sensitive, domain-specific data, raising significant concerns regarding the memorization and subsequent leakage of train-ing records (Kandpal et al., 2024). To quan-tify these practical deployment risks, Empir-ical Privacy Auditing (EPA) has become an essential evaluation tool. EPA is often opera-tionalized by executing Membership Inference (MI) or data reconstruction attacks against a target model (Shokri et al., 2017; Jagielski et al., 2020; Carlini et al., 2021; Nasr et al., 2021; Carlini et al., 2022). To the extent that the model withstands strong simulated attacks, we have increased confidence that the model can be deployed without risking expo-sure of sensitive information inherent in the training data. A standard EPA procedure involves inject-ing traceable “canaries” into the training set and subsequently attacking the trained model (or the synthetic data it generates) to deter-mine if the canary’s presence can be detected or its contents extracted (Carlini et al., 2019). The success of the attack depends heavily on the specific nature and design of these canaries, among other factors (Nasr et al., 2023). Ideal canaries must balance a tradeoff be-tween being in- vs. out-of-distribution with respect to the private fine-tuning data. On the one hand, out-of-distribution canaries could act as high-influence outliers to max-imize the privacy leakage signal, giving em-pirical estimates that accurately reflect the risk of a realistic attack against worst-case 

> arXiv:2606.10481v1 [cs.LG] 9 Jun 2026

(most easily identifiable) data (Maddock et al., 2022; Koskela and Mohammadi, 2025). How-ever, examples which are too far out-of-distribution may not be learnable with the limited capability of parameter-efficient fine-tuning (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022), or may not be represented in synthetic data generated by a model (Meeus et al., 2025). Another con-sideration is that auditing with canaries that are closer to the private data distribution may be more effective at providing reassurance to users that data “like theirs” is not vulnerable. In this paper, we propose a novel canary generation method that resolves the tension between identifiability and naturalness. We in-troduce the use of synthetic canaries generated by prompting a pretrained, instruction-tuned LLM at a high temperature ( T ≥ 0.8) (Ackley et al., 1985). Scaling the sampling tempera-ture flattens the output distribution, produc-ing text that is statistically unlikely under the base distribution but usually retaining essen-tial syntactic and semantic structures. Our canaries are sufficiently unusual to trigger a measurable response during gradient updates, rendering them highly susceptible to MI and reconstruction attacks, while remaining suffi-ciently similar to real user data and struc-turally coherent enough to avoid corrupting the model’s primary objective. A crucial advantage of our approach is that it makes no reference to the private data be-yond knowledge of the basic format in order to design an effective prompt. Thus, it is un-necessary to account for the privacy cost of ac-cessing the data for canary generation. Group privacy properties (security of secrets shared by small groups) can be ascertained by insert-ing canaries with repetition, which would oth-erwise increase vulnerability of the repeated user data. In addition, it can be convenient to be able to freely inspect the canaries dur-ing development without compromising user privacy. We also introduce a novel methodology for auditing synthetic data. Existing data audits generally assume that leakage appears as ver-batim regurgitation or direct semantic similar-ity between canaries and individual synthetic examples generated by the model (Meeus et al., 2025). In practice, a canary can exert a more subtle, diffuse influence, slightly shifting the distribution of tokens or concepts across the entire synthetic dataset (Cloud et al., 2026). To capture this sparse signal, our audit fine-tunes an auxiliary “attack” LLM on the generated synthetic data. Because the attack model aggregates these diffuse signals into its weights, a canary observed during training of the primary model will exhibit a higher likeli-hood (according to the attack model) than an unobserved canary from the same distribution. This proxy-based approach effectively bridges data and model auditing, allowing us to run standard model-level MI attacks on the attack model to detect subtle data leakage. Unlike prior approaches, we directly audit the concrete set of synthetic data to be released as opposed to requiring generating multiple shadow sets in a Robust-MIA style attack (Zarifzadeh et al., 2024). Furthermore, because we can use exactly the same auditing approach for the original fine-tuned model and the auxiliary model, we gain a fair assessment of the relative leakage of releasing a fine-tuned model, versus only releasing synthetic data sampled from it. The primary contributions of our work are as follows: 1. We introduce high-temperature sampling as a scalable, automated method to gener-ate highly effective canaries for LLM au-diting. These synthetic canaries are some-what in-distribution for the pre-trained model, and hence easy for the pre-trained model to memorize even via LoRA. Thus they yield significantly stronger MI and reconstruction attack signals for LoRA compared to baselines from the literature. 2. We design a new data auditing methodol-ogy to estimate leakage in synthetic data generated by a fine-tuned model. We demonstrate that this attack is signifi-cantly more sensitive across canary types than baseline attacks from the literature. 3. Using our canaries and powerful model and data audits, we perform a systematic study of the effect of model capacity (as measured by LoRA rank) and canary en-tropy on memorization metrics. We find that the canary entropy that maximizes memorization increases with LoRA rank, and is lower for reconstruction attacks than MI attacks. 

2 Preliminaries and Related Work 

2.1 Differentially Private Training 

Differential privacy (DP) provides a rigor-ous framework for formal privacy protections. While DP guarantees can be expressed in sev-eral ways, with approximate (ε, δ )-DP being particularly well-known in the ML community, we follow Gomez et al. (2025) in focusing on Gaussian Differential Privacy ( μ-GDP) (Dong et al., 2022), as it often more accurately ex-presses the privacy profile of modern DP ma-chine learning algorithms. Two datasets D

and D′ are considered adjacent if they differ by the addition or removal of a single example x,i.e., D′ = D∪{ x}. A randomized algorithm M

satisfies μ-GDP if for any adjacent D, D ′ dis-tinguishing between the output distributions 

M(D) and M(D′) is at least as statistically difficult as distinguishing between two normal distributions N (0 , 1) and N (μ, 1) . This pro-vides a single, highly interpretable privacy pa-rameter μ, where a smaller μ corresponds to stronger privacy protection. DP-SGD (Song et al., 2013; Abadi et al., 2016) is the canonical algorithm for training machine learning mod-els with DP. A full description of DP-SGD is given in App. A.3.3. Our primary results examine the memorization properties of non-DP models, but we still use an empirically-estimated μ to quantify memorization as we describe next. 

2.2 Empirical Privacy Auditing 

Empirical privacy auditing refers to a suite of methods to estimate the practical privacy risk of training on sensitive data (c.f. Ponomareva et al. (2025, Sec 7.5)). We instantiate a hypo-thetical adversary with at least as much power and information as a realistic adversary might be presumed to have. In this work we con-sider several attacks that vary the adversary’s information and goal. In a model audit , the adversary has access to the fine-tuned model, whereas in a weaker data audit , they only ob-serve a finite set of synthetic examples gener-ated from the model. We also consider two potential adversary goals: reconstruction , in which the adversary attempts to infer some un-known text (the suffix) given a known prefix, and membership inference , in which the adver-sary has the relatively easier task of guessing whether a known example was part of train-ing or not. Both attacks require a set of ca-naries Cin that are inserted into the training data (potentially with repetition), and another set Cout drawn from the same distribution that functions as a control. Denote by θpt the pre-trained model parameters (used to initialize fine-tuning) and by θft the model parameters after fine-tuning with canaries inserted. 

Reconstruction attack. A straightforward way to attack an LLM is to assume the adver-sary knows the prefix of some user’s data, and then prompt the model with that prefix with greedy decoding to attempt to learn the suf-fix. In our setup, we take the first 60 tokens of a canary, and ask the model to complete the 10-token suffix given the first 50 tokens. The adversary “wins” if the Levenshtein edit distance between the completion and the true suffix is less than d (where we consider d from 0 to 5). Because for some canary types the ad-versary could guess a few tokens purely based on the statistics of language, we measure the 

lift , Ld, or how many more seen canary suf-fixes are completed at a given edit distance compared to unseen canary suffixes: 

δ(c) = edit (greedy (c[:-10] | θft ), c [-10:] )

Ld = |c ∈ C in : δ(c) ≤ d| − | c ∈ C out : δ(c) ≤ d|

Membership Inference attack. Here the adversary’s goal is to guess whether a known-verbatim canary was part of training or not. We quantify the success of a membership infer-ence attack by estimating its empirical μ-GDP parameter from the likelihood ratio scores of held-in vs. held-out canaries: 

s(c) = log Pr( c | θft ) − log Pr( c | θpt ).

The positive term is precisely what generative fine-tuning attempts to maximize, while the negative term adjusts for the intrinsic likeli-hood of the canary text. We report the em-pirical μ-GDP (Nasr et al., 2023; Mahlouji-far et al., 2026) of the attack. Recent work shows that for realistic attacks μ-GDP esti-mates are relatively stable across classification thresholds, except for the extreme tails where noise dominates (Koskela and Mohammadi, 2025). Defining the number of true positives and true negatives for a given threshold as 

ntp (τ ) = |{ c ∈ C in : s(c) > τ }| 

nfp (τ ) = |{ c ∈ C out : s(c) > τ }| ,

we consider the set of thresholds with at least 30 examples classified as positive or negative: 

T = {τ : 30 ≤ nfp (τ ) + ntp (τ ) ≤ 2n − 30 },

where n = ∥C in ∥ = ∥C out ∥ is the number of unique canaries per set. We estimate the true positive and false positive rates using a Jef-freys prior so our μ estimate reaches a large but bounded value even when the canaries are perfectly identifiable: 1

rfp (τ ) = nfp (τ ) + 0 .5

n + 1 , r tp (τ ) = ntp (τ ) + 0 .5

n + 1 .

Finally we estimate μ according to 

μ = max  

> τ∈T

∣∣Φ−1(rtp (τ )) − Φ−1(rfp (τ )) ∣∣ ,

where Φ−1 is the inverse CDF of the standard normal distribution. We use n = 3000 unique canaries per set, so the estimated μ of a perfect classifier is 7.17. We use bias corrected and accelerated (BCa) bootstrapping over the sets of scores to estimate a 95% confidence interval on μ (Efron, 1987). In addition, we report the common metric of TPR-at-fixed-low-FPR: 

rtp (τ ∗) where rfp (τ ∗) = 0 .01 or 0.1.

2.3 Synthetic Data Auditing 

Private synthetic text generation—fine-tuning a model with DP over private data and prompting it to sample from the learned distribution—is a useful way to produce high-fidelity linguistic data tuned to a target distri-bution without exposing the sensitive informa-tion (Ponomareva et al., 2025). The goal of synthetic data auditing is to trace the influence of individual training exam-ples through to a synthetic dataset D = {di}

generated by the fine-tuned model θft . Hav-ing access only to D makes the attacker’s task   

> 1In a real privacy auditing scenario, all models in this low privacy regime should be considered unsafe, so this smoothing would not matter – we could just report an infinite estimate when ntp = 0 , for example. But, it is useful in this work to be able to distinguish between settings with high memorization.

much harder, but as we will show, strong mem-bership inference and even significant recon-struction is still possible. Meeus et al. (2025) introduce two forms of data-based MI attacks. Like the model attack described in Sec. 2.2, both derive a membership signal s(c), but s

now depends only on D and not directly on 

θft . In the similarity-based attack, the attacker computes the similarity of the canary to each synthetic example σi(c) = SIM (c, d i), using for example Jaccard similarity for strings or cosine similarity between embeddings. Then the score of a canary is the mean similarity of the top k most-similar examples: ssim (c) = 

> 1
> k

∑kj=1 σi(j).2 In the bigram attack, the at-tacker trains a simple bigram language model with Laplace smoothing over the synthetic data and uses it to estimate the likelihood of the canary. Thus 

sbi (c) = 

> L

∑

> i=1

log #( c[i-1] , c [i] ) + 1 #c[i-1] + V ,

where #t represents the number of occurrences of a unigram or bigram in D, and V is the size of the vocabulary. 3

2.4 Related Work 

Reconstruction and membership inference at-tacks such as the ones we use are now the de-facto methods for privacy auditing (Shokri et al., 2017; Hayes et al., 2017; Carlini et al., 2019, 2021). While (ε, δ )-DP has often been used as the measure of leakage in privacy auditing, μ-GDP (Dong et al., 2022) has re-cently gained popularity as a leakage measure (Mahloujifar et al., 2026; Koskela and Moham-madi, 2025; Nasr et al., 2023) because it lends to tighter audits and better aligns with the hy-pothesis testing (TPR vs. FPR) notion of dif-ferential privacy (Wasserman and Zhou, 2010; Kairouz et al., 2015) used in auditing works, even those not focused on differential privacy.  

> 2Meeus et al. (2025) find the similarity attacks to be weaker than the bigram attack, so we do not compare to them in this study.
> 3Meeus et al. (2025) generate multiple sets of data to get a set of “in” and “out” scores for each canary in an RMIA-style attack (Zarifzadeh et al., 2024). Our method (described in Sec. 4) requires only a single syn-thetic dataset (the one that is to be certified private for release), so we also only compute our bigram language model over that single dataset for this attack. Note that we could also apply RMIA to our attack, which should also make it stronger.

A central design choice in empirical audit-ing is the construction of the canaries them-selves. In the context of auditing models, Carlini et al. (2019) introduced canaries as inserted sequences for measuring unintended memorization. Since then, canary design has become an active research area: Canife uses gradient-based optimization to produce highly detectable canaries (Maddock et al., 2022); Boglioni et al. (2026) optimize canaries using meta-gradient descent for an image classifica-tion task; other work has used fixed templated structures (Nasr et al., 2023); and Panda et al. (2025) proposed least-common-bigram canaries as an out-of-distribution construction for privacy auditing. The most closely related work is Meeus et al. (2025), which studies pri-vacy auditing for synthetic data released by a fine-tuned model. Their canaries combine pre-fixes sampled from the private data with gener-ated suffixes, and their data audits use whole-example similarity-based and bigram-based at-tacks. We improve on prior state-of-the-art in sev-eral ways. First, as our canaries are gener-ated by prompting the pretrained model, they tend to be more easily memorizable when fine-tuning that model (as we demonstrate). They also do not require access to the private train-ing data. At the same time, an attack using our synthetic canaries is more plausible com-pared to canaries constructed from unseen bi-grams, or out-of-vocabulary tokens that could not occur in real user data. Second, our model-based synthetic data audit lets diffuse leak-age signals accumulate in the attack model rather than requiring direct verbatim over-lap at the example or even bigram level, sig-nificantly increasing its generality and power. Similar to Marek et al. (2026), we benchmark our canaries and data auditing method in the context of low rank adaptation. Our find-ings on the memorization properties of LoRA echo their results: LoRA offers more protec-tion for OOD data (Marek et al., 2026), see App. A.3.1. 

3 Synthetic Canary Design 

We generate synthetic canary examples by prompting the instruction-tuned version of the same pre-trained model that will be used to ini-tialize our audited fine-tuning run 4. In our ex-periments we use the Gemma3 12B-parameter model, and fine-tune it on the Enron email cor-pus. We propose using prompts that stimulate the model to produce text that is relatively in-distribution for the fine-tuning dataset, but still unique. App. A.1 includes our prompt and examples of canaries. We generate with 

top_p = 1 .0 and use values of temperature T

ranging from 0.8 to 3. This construction natu-rally subsumes uniform random token canaries as a special case as T → ∞ .In order to ensure our privacy audits ac-curately capture the empirical privacy of the model we will ultimately deploy, we advocate inserting canaries during the same training run used for the final model. This also avoids the cost of training a separate model for auditing. In some applications it may not be prohibitive to train two models with identical hyperpa-rameters, one with canaries inserted just for auditing. Even though there would be no con-cern about canaries impacting the final model in this case, canaries resembling user data still offer the advantage of interpretability. 

3.1 Baseline Canary Types 

We compare our synthetic canaries to several baselines. All of our canary types have at least 60 tokens. Since our primary goal is to compare the performance of canary selec-tion strategies rather than evaluate how ca-nary length influences memorization, we only consider the first 60 tokens of all canaries for both reconstruction and MI. 

RANDOM. 60 tokens drawn uniformly i.i.d. from the multilingual vocabulary of size approximately 260k. 

ENRON. Examples from the Enron test set. We ensure that the first 60 tokens of these ca-naries have edit distance at least ten to each other and every 60 token sequence in the train set. We remove every example containing the first 60 tokens of any canary from the test set. App. A.2.2 contains further information. 

PERP. Following the construction of Meeus et al. (2025), we sample 30-token prefixes from the test data and prompt the pretrained 

> 4We experiment with using a different model to gen-erate canaries in App. A.3.2.

Algorithm 1: Fine-tune model with Canaries 

Input: Pretrained parameters θpt ; Fine-tuning dataset D; canaries Cin ; repetitions r;steps t; learning rate η; batch size B; DP flag; noise multiplier σ; clip norm S;Poisson expected batch size q · |D Enron |

Output: Fine-tuned parameters θft  

> 1

// Inject canaries into training data  

> 2

D′ ← D \ last r|C in | examples;  

> 3

D′ ← Shuffle (D′ ∪ C ×r

> in

); 

> 4

// Initialize trainable parameters (LoRA adapter or full weights)  

> 5

θft ← InitParams (θpt , lora_rank ); 

> 6

for step t = 1 to t do  

> 7

if DP then  

> 8

B ∼ PoissonSample (D′, q ) ; // expected size q|D ′| 

> 9

g ← 1

> |B|

∑ 

> x∈B

Clip (∇θft L(x; θft ), S ) + N (0 , σ 2S2I); 

> 10

else  

> 11

B ∼ MinibatchSample (D′, B ); 

> 12

g ← 1

> |B|

∑ 

> x∈B

∇θft L(x; θft ); 

> 13

end  

> 14

θft ← AdamW (θft , g, η ); 

> 15

end  

> 16

return θft ;Gemma3 12B model to generate a 30-token suf-fix. We tune the generation temperature and use rejection sampling to keep only canaries with a suffix perplexity in the range 28–110, since Meeus et al. (2025)’s experiments ablat-ing perplexity found canaries in this range to perform well for data auditing. We remove all test examples whose prefixes were used to form the PERP canary set. See App. A.2.2 for details. 

BIGRAM. 5 Following the construction of Panda et al. (2025), these canaries consist of the bigram AB , where tokens A and B occur exactly once in the fine-tuning data, but the bi-gram AB never occurs. 6 The 60-token canary is formed by tiling the bigram 30x 7.

TEMPLATED. We use a template describ-ing a person including multiple types of poten-tially personally-identifying information filled in with random values using the Faker li-  

> 5These bigram canaries are not to be confused with the unrelated bigram data audit described in Sec. 2.3.
> 6In Panda et al. (2025), the bigrams are sorted in vocabulary order and the first nbigrams are selected. To avoid dependence between the canaries, we sample uniformly from the set of candidate bigrams.
> 7We omit BIGRAM from reconstruction metrics, as tiling renders reconstruction trivial.

brary. 8 The template is designed to be approx-imately 60 tokens, and after sampling we tok-enize and reject any that do not have exactly 60 tokens. An example templated canary: Hi, it’s Kim Wells. I’m 55 years old, I live at 801 Leach Isle in Alexismouth, and I’ve got a JD and work as aclinical embryologist. Reach me at 9474642007 

4 Model-based Data Audit 

In their study on the data audit methods de-scribed in Sec. 2.3, Meeus et al. (2025) show the bigram attack to be consistently more sensitive than either similarity-based attack. Thus, the influence of canaries on synthetic data is more subtle than full synthetic ex-amples being textually or semantically simi-lar to individual canaries. Our attack takes this intuition further: canaries can cause sub-tle distributional shifts in the synthetic data even without necessarily regurgitating individ-ual tokens or bigrams, by marginally increas-ing the probability of generating semantically related tokens or topics. This may be related to the recently described phenomenon of “sub-

> 8http://pypi.org/project/Faker/

Algorithm 2: Audit a Fine-tuned Model 

Input: Pretrained parameters θpt ; fine-tuned parameters θft ; canaries Cin (seen), Cout 

(unseen); canary token length ℓ = 60 

Output: Estimated ˆμ; reconstruction lift {Ld}5 

> d=0
> 1

// Membership inference: likelihood-ratio score (§2, Eq. s(c))  

> 2

foreach c ∈ C in ∪ C out do  

> 3

s(c) ← log Pr( c[: ℓ] | θft ) − log Pr( c[: ℓ] | θpt ); 

> 4

end  

> 5

ˆμ ← EstimateGDP ({s(c)}c∈C in , {s(c)}c∈C out ); 

> 6

// Reconstruction attack: greedy suffix completion (§2, Eq. δ(c)) 

> 7

foreach c ∈ C in ∪ C out do  

> 8

δ(c) ← edit (greedy (c[:-10] | θft ), c [-10:] ); 

> 9

end  

> 10

for d = 0 to 5 do  

> 11

Ld ← |{ c ∈ C in : δ(c) ≤ d}| − |{ c ∈ C out : δ(c) ≤ d}| ; 

> 12

end  

> 13

return ˆμ, {Ld}5

> d=0

;

Algorithm 3: Generate Synthetic Data from a Fine-tuned Model 

Input: Fine-tuned parameters θft ; prompt p; number of examples N ; temperature T ;top-p nucleus pnuc 

Output: Synthetic dataset D = {di}Ni=1  

> 1

D ← ∅; 

> 2

while |D| < N do  

> 3

B ← Sample (θft , input = p, T, p nuc ) ; // autoregressive generation  

> 4

D ← D ∪ B ; 

> 5

end  

> 6

return D;liminal learning”, in which a student model trained on the synthetic output of a teacher model learns preferences of the teacher model, even when trained on semantically unrelated data (Cloud et al., 2026). To capture these dis-tributed leakage signals, we fine-tune an aux-iliary (“attack”) LLM on the synthetic data, and then apply the model-based MI attack de-scribed in Sec. 2.2 to that attack model. See App. 5.1 for full pseudocode. The sparsely dis-tributed influences of a canary in the synthetic data are aggregated into the attack model’s weights, nudging the canary likelihood higher compared to an unobserved canary from the same distribution. This framework reduces the data auditing problem to a model audit-ing problem, unifying metrics to support a fair comparison of the exposure risk of the two at-tack surfaces. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Setup 

Full details of our implementation and hyper-parameters are included in App. A.2. Here we summarize our setup and provide pseudo-code of our privacy auditing pipeline. 

Fine-tuning methods. For our main re-sults, we fine-tune Gemma3 12B (Team, 2025) on the Enron training dataset (Shetty and Adibi, 2004) using the AdamW opti-mizer (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017) for a sin-gle epoch. We use LoRA fine-tuning with rank 64, and train with a batch size of 64 over 7275 steps. We conduct a number of ablations on Gemma3 1B, to comprehensively explore the effects of model rank r ∈ [4 , 16 , 64 , full ]

(A.3.1) and DP training (A.3.3) on memoriza-tion. We performed hyperparameter tuning to determine the appropriate learning rate for Algorithm 4: Full Privacy Auditing Pipeline 

Input: Pretrained parameters θpt ; Fine-tuning dataset D; canary sets Cin , Cout ;hyperparameters (Algorithms 1–3) 

Output: Model audit and synthetic data audit results  

> 1

// Stage 1 : Fine-tune on original data with canaries  

> 2

θft ← FineTune (θpt , D, Cin ) (Algorithm 1);  

> 3

// Stage 2 : Audit the fine-tuned model  

> 4

ˆμmodel , {Ld}model ← Audit (θpt , θ ft , Cin , Cout ) (Algorithm 2);  

> 5

// Stage 3 : Generate synthetic data from θft  

> 6

Dsynth ← GenerateSynthetic (θft ) (Algorithm 3);  

> 7

// Stage 4 : Fine-tune attack model on synthetic data with canaries  

> 8

θatk ← FineTune (θpt , Dsynth , Cin ) (Algorithm 1);  

> 9

// Stage 5 : Audit the attack model  

> 10

ˆμdata , {Ld}data ← Audit (θpt , θ atk , Cin , Cout ) (Algorithm 2);  

> 11

return (ˆμmodel , {Ld}model 

), (ˆμdata , {Ld}data 

);each training configuration. See App. A.2 for details. 

Dataset design. Enron train consists of 517,401 emails with the fields ‘subject’ and ‘body’, which we randomly divide into a 90/10 train/test split, and format as follows: 

> { "input": "Write an email thread with 1 message.", "target": f"Subject:\n{subject}\nBody:\n{body}" }

We tokenize and truncate or pad examples up to a max sequence length of 1024, using the Gemma3 tokenizer. We construct datasets of 6000 unique ca-nary sequences, for each baseline and sampling temperature T considered, as presented in Sec-tion 3. These canary sequences are formatted into examples according to the structure given above, with the ‘subject’ set to the byte literal 0 and the ‘body’ field containing the canary text. Each canary dataset is randomly parti-tioned into Cin , Cout with |C in | = |C out | = 3000 .We replace examples in Enron train with 

Cin , such that they are interleaved through-out the training corpus. We vary the num-ber of repetitions of each unique canary from 

reps ∈ [1 , 3, 10 , 30] to study the effect of rep-etitions on memorization and privacy leakage. We choose a maximum of 30 repetitions to en-sure the total number of canaries does not ex-ceed 20% of the Enron train set. Our primary results focus on 10 canary repetitions, which replace 6.4% of the training data. Note that we use a high percentage of canaries in our ex-periments to ensure statistically significant lev-els of memorization. In a production setting, fewer canaries might be favored for less of an impact on downstream model performance. 

Synthetic data generation. We sample from the fine-tuned model checkpoints to generate 100k synthetic examples from each model, using the same prompt as the train-ing examples (including canaries) were format-ted with: "Write an email thread with 1 message." We use top_p = 1.0 and 

temperature = 1.0 to draw samples from the true model distribution, which the attack model attempts to relearn. These samples are used for data auditing, as well as assessing model quality. 

Attack model for data audit. We fine-tune the same base model, Gemma3 12B, us-ing LoRA rank 64 on the generated synthetic data to yield an attack model per canary type for performing a data audit. We use the same hyperparameters as were tuned for fine-tuning, and train on the synthetic data for 5 epochs. See App. A.2 for details. 

Metrics. We consider empirical privacy au-diting measures of estimated μ, TPR-at-0.01-FPR, TPR-at-0.1-FPR, and reconstruction lift at edit distances d ∈ [0 , 1, 2, 3, 4, 5] . These measures are applied to the fine-tuned models for model audit results, as well as to the at-tack models for data audit results. Our model quality measures include held-out loss and MAUVE scores (Pillutla et al., 2021) of syn-Figure 1: Our high-temperature canaries yield the strongest MI performance across canary types and repetitions. For reconstruction across edit distances, moderate temperature canaries are strongest.     

> Figure 2: The strength of our LLM-based data au-dit far surpasses the strength of the bigram data audit (Meeus et al., 2025). The x=yline plotted in gray indicates equal strength.

thetic data sampled from the fine-tuned mod-els. App. A.4.2 contains details on MAUVE. 

Pseudo-code. We provide pseudo-code for our full privacy auditing pipeline. Algorithm 1 describes fine-tuning a model with AdamW on a dataset with canaries inserted, Algorithm 2 describes the membership inference attack and reconstruction attacks on a fine-tuned model, Algorithm 3 describes synthetic data gener-ation, and Algorithm 4 (pipeline) describes the complete procedure for running both the model audit and data audit. 

5.2 Results Synthetic canaries maximize model audit signals. When measuring attack strength with MI (Fig. 1, left), high temper-ature canaries are favorable across repetitions. The weaker performance of RANDOM with fewer than 30 reps indicates higher entropy does not always lead to increased memoriza-tion. Though visually T = 3 canaries resem-ble RANDOM (see Table 1), these canaries are somewhat constrained, as each token is condi-tioned on prior tokens. By contrast, when measuring model audit performance in terms of reconstruction lift (Fig. 1, right), moderate to high tempera-ture synthetic canaries (T ∈ [0 .8, 1.0, 1.5] )strictly dominate all baseline canary types. Reconstruction attacks provide higher signal on lower entropy sequences, which are more likely generated by the model. The interplay between data entropy and model memorization is a function of not only the measurement type, canary repetitions and temperature, but also the model’s finetuning capacity. App. A.3.1 expands on these results, leveraging synthetic canaries to study the ef-fect of LoRA rank on memorization. App. A.3.3 includes experiments that val-idate the strength of synthetic canaries un-der DP, offering signal where baseline canary types fail. An assessment of model quality in App. A.4 examines the impact of training with a relatively high percentage of synthetic canaries on the model’s held-out loss and the quality of synthetic data generation. Figure 3: Synthetic canaries remain the strongest in the data audit setting. MI performance is best at high temperatures with limited attack model training. We achieve significant reconstruction lift with our data audit attack. T = 0 .8 canaries are strongest for reconstruction. 

Model-based data audit outperforms bi-gram baseline. Our LLM-based data au-dit is significantly stronger than the existing bigram data audit approach of Meeus et al. (2025), as seen in Fig. 2. Here we show the maximum estimated μ across attack model training. App. A.5.1 includes additional met-rics. We evaluate each data audit approach us-ing a single training run, rather than training multiple models over varying sets of canaries, which better aligns to the realistic threat sce-nario of releasing a single synthetic dataset. 

Robustness of synthetic canaries in data audits. In this setting we find that our syn-thetic canaries remain strongest, outperform-ing baselines. This is the case both for MI (Fig. 3, left) and reconstruction (Fig. 3, right). We see a similar trend in canary temperature for data auditing as for model auditing: MI is stronger on higher temperature canaries, while reconstruction is stronger on moderate temper-ature canaries. The MI performance gap between T = 3 ca-naries (best) and RANDOM (worst) is indica-tive of a hidden effect of synthetic generation that allows for easier memorization of seem-ingly maximal-entropy sequences. The model audit reconstruction attack showcases this gap between signal produced by generations from models trained on T = 3 canaries and RAN-DOM, which propagates into the data audit attacks, run on synthetic generations. The significant reconstruction signal of our model-based data audit indicates a real pri-vacy risk for sensitive data used in fine-tuning, even when only generated samples are released. This strong evidence counters any naive as-sumption that releasing data generated from a model should be considered safe. 

Model/Data Audit Gap. The LLM-based data audit unifies model- and data-auditing. Our methodology opens the door to a more direct comparison of the memorization prop-erties of a model with the data it generates, quantifying how much more difficult the ad-versary’s task becomes when they have access only to the synthetic data. In Fig. 4 we plot, for all canary types, the data audit μ vs. the model audit μ (and similarly for the TPR met-rics). The results suggest that, for this sce-nario with 10 canary repetitions and 100k syn-thetic data examples, there is a significant de-gree of privacy protection provided by keeping the fine-tuned model locked down, releasing only synthetic data. We leave for future work to employ these methods to more systemati-cally explore this gap. 

6 Conclusion 

We demonstrate that synthetic canaries gener-ated from the pre-trained model with moder-ately high T yield strong MI and reconstruc-tion attack performance for auditing PEFT models, outperforming existing baselines. We advance state-of-the-art in data auditing with a model-based attack that achieves significant Figure 4: There is a significant gap between the difficulty of performing MI given full access to the weights of the fine-tuned model, vs. only to the synthetic data it generates. The x = y line plotted in gray indicates equal strength. 

reconstruction lift. Moreover, our synthetic canaries remain strongest for data audits. Using these synthetic canaries, we perform a comprehensive investigation of the relation-ship between memorization and model capac-ity, finding that higher-capacity models are more prone to memorizing higher-entropy sam-ples (A.3.1). In studying the effectiveness of these canaries under DP, we not only find that our synthetic canaries are the strongest, but also are leaked in cases where all other canaries gave insignificant empirical μ < 1.35 (corre-sponding to 75% TPR-at-25%-FPR) (A.3.3). Together our high-temperature canaries and model-based data audit raise the bar for de-tecting leakage in private parameter-efficient fine-tuning of LLMs, helping better measure the risk of adversarial attacks. Our unified data and model audit methodology opens the door for future work to more carefully explore the gap between the empirical privacy risk of releasing a model vs. its synthetic data. 

Limitations 

In this paper we focused on the Enron dataset as it is a rare example of a public dataset that was originally sensitive in nature, making it a representative benchmark for privacy auditing. While we believe factors such as the canary distribution and the details of the attack to be more influential than the contextual data, ideally future work can reproduce our results on other benchmarks of interest. Our prompt for generating canaries in particular is tailored to this dataset, so generalizing our work to other settings requires tailoring the prompt ap-propriately, although we feel this should be straightforward in practice. While we conducted a number of ablations, there are some dimensions of the experimental setup we did not ablate. For example, our pa-per focuses on training and auditing a single model whereas in resource abundant settings one might prefer to train multiple models as part of an audit. As another example, we fixed the size of the synthetic dataset, so our results do not give any evidence for how varying the synthetic dataset size will affect the strength of our model-based data audit. A limitation of our LLM-based data audit is that it requires training an attack model on the synthetic dataset, which is more com-putationally expensive than, e.g., the bigram model-based audit. In many of our settings the cost of this attack model is not large com-pared to the cost of training the original model, but in other settings this might not be the case. Ideally, future work could study whether techniques such as using a smaller LLM as an attack model could alleviate the computa-tional cost of our attack without sacrificing the strength of the audit. Ethical Considerations 

Our paper improves the state of empirical pri-vacy auditing, which allows users to better de-tect subtle privacy violations that can occur while training a model on sensitive data. In turn, we believe the ethical impact of our work is generally positive. We emphasize that an empirical privacy audit demonstrating low pri-vacy leakage is a necessary but often insuffi-cient condition for a model to be considered private. That is, in addition to running pri-vacy auditing, we encourage practitioners to use more formal privacy methods such as DP-SGD when working with sensitive data. 

Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank Zachary Garrett for his help in improving the efficiency of our im-plementation, and Ryan McKenna for his help in integrating jax_privacy .

References 

Martín Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian J. Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Tal-war, and Li Zhang. 2016. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proc. of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conf. on Computer and Communica-tions Security (CCS’16) , pages 308–318. David H Ackley, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ter-rence J Sejnowski. 1985. A learning algorithm for boltzmann machines. Cognitive science ,9(1):147–169. Borja Balle, Leonard Berrada, Zachary Charles, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Soham De, Vadym Doroshenko, Dj Dvijotham, Galen An-drew, Arun Ganesh, Sahra Ghalebikesabi, Jamie Hayes, Peter Kairouz, Ryan McKenna, Brendan McMahan, Aneesh Pappu, Natalia Ponomareva, Mikhail Pravilov, Keith Rush, Samuel L Smith, and Robert Stanforth. 2025. JAX-Privacy: Al-gorithms for privacy-preserving machine learn-ing in jax. Tianshu Bao, Jeff Carpenter, Lin Chai, Haoyu Gao, Yangmu Jiang, Shadi Noghabi, Abheesht Sharma, Sizhi Tan, Lance Wang, Ann Yan, Weiren Yu, and 1 others. 2025. Tunix (tune-in-jax). https://github.com/google/tunix .Matteo Boglioni, Terrance Liu, Andrew Ilyas, and Steven Wu. 2026. Optimizing canaries for pri-vacy auditing with metagradient descent. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Nicholas Carlini, Steve Chien, Milad Nasr, Shuang Song, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramer. 2022. Membership inference attacks from first princi-ples. In 2022 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP) , pages 1897–1914. IEEE. Nicholas Carlini, Chang Liu, Úlfar Erlingsson, Jernej Kos, and Dawn Song. 2019. The se-cret sharer: Evaluating and testing unintended memorization in neural networks. In 28th USENIX security symposium (USENIX security 19) , pages 267–284. Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Kather-ine Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, and 1 others. 2021. Extracting training data from large language models. In 30th USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security 21) , pages 2633–2650. Lynn Chua, Badih Ghazi, Pritish Kamath, Ravi Kumar, Pasin Manurangsi, Amer Sinha, and Chiyuan Zhang. 2024. Scalable dp-sgd: Shuf-fling vs. poisson subsampling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol-ume 37, pages 70026–70047. Curran Associates, Inc. Alex Cloud, Minh Le, James Chua, Jan Betley, Anna Sztyber-Betley, Sören Mindermann, Ja-cob Hilton, Samuel Marks, and Owain Evans. 2026. Language models transmit behavioural traits through hidden signals in data. Nature ,652:615–621. et al. Dangyi Liu, Jiwon Shin. 2024. Qwix: A quan-tization library for jax. https://github.com/ google/qwix .Jinshuo Dong, Aaron Roth, and Weijie J Su. 2022. Gaussian differential privacy. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , 84(1):3–37. Bradley Efron. 1987. Better bootstrap confidence intervals. Journal of the American statistical As-sociation , 82(397):171–185. Juan Felipe Gomez, Bogdan Kulynych, Geor-gios Kaissis, Flavio P Calmon, Jamie Hayes, Borja Balle, and Antti Honkela. 2025. Gaus-sian dp for reporting differential privacy guar-antees in machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10945 .Jamie Hayes, Luca Melis, George Danezis, and Emiliano De Cristofaro. 2017. Logan: Member-ship inference attacks against generative models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07663 .Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Liang Wang, Weizhu Chen, and 1 others. 2022. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. 

Iclr , 1(2):3. Matthew Jagielski, Jonathan Ullman, and Alina Oprea. 2020. Auditing differentially private ma-chine learning: How private is private sgd? Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 33:22205–22216. Peter Kairouz, Sewoong Oh, and Pramod Viswanath. 2015. The composition theorem for differential privacy. In International conference on machine learning , pages 1376–1385. PMLR. Nikhil Kandpal, Krishna Pillutla, Alina Oprea, Peter Kairouz, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, and Zheng Xu. 2024. User inference attacks on large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in natu-ral language processing , pages 18238–18265. Antti Koskela and Jafar Aco Mohammadi. 2025. Auditing differential privacy guarantees using density estimation. In 2025 IEEE Conference on Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML) , pages 1007–1026. IEEE. Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2017. Decou-pled weight decay regularization. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Samuel Maddock, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and Pierre Stock. 2022. Canife: Crafting canaries for empirical privacy measurement in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02912 .Saeed Mahloujifar, Luca Melis, and Kamalika Chaudhuri. 2026. Auditing f-differential pri-vacy in one run. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning ,ICML’25. JMLR.org. Bartłomiej Marek, Lorenzo Rossi, Vincent Hanke, Xun Wang, Michael Backes, Franziska Boenisch, and Adam Dziedzic. 2026. Benchmarking empir-ical privacy protection for adaptations of large language models. In The Fourteenth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Matthieu Meeus, Lukas Wutschitz, Santiago Zanella-Beguelin, Shruti Tople, and Reza Shokri. 2025. The canary’s echo: Auditing privacy risks of LLM-generated synthetic text. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Milad Nasr, Jamie Hayes, Thomas Steinke, Borja Balle, Florian Tramèr, Matthew Jagiel-ski, Nicholas Carlini, and Andreas Terzis. 2023. Tight auditing of differentially private machine learning. In 32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23) , pages 1631–1648. Milad Nasr, Shuang Song, Abhradeep Thakurta, Nicolas Papernot, and Nicholas Carlini. 2021. Adversary instantiation: Lower bounds for dif-ferentially private machine learning. In 2021 IEEE Symposium on security and privacy (SP) ,pages 866–882. IEEE. Ashwinee Panda, Xinyu Tang, Milad Nasr, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, and Prateek Mittal. 2025. Privacy auditing of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06808 .Krishna Pillutla, Swabha Swayamdipta, Rowan Zellers, John Thickstun, Sean Welleck, Yejin Choi, and Zaid Harchaoui. 2021. Mauve: Measuring the gap between neural text and human text using divergence frontiers. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 34:4816–4828. Natalia Ponomareva, Zheng Xu, H. Brendan McMahan, Peter Kairouz, Lucas Rosenblatt, Vincent Cohen-Addad, Cristóbal Guzmán, Ryan McKenna, Galen Andrew, Alex Bie, Da Yu, Alex Kurakin, Morteza Zadimoghaddam, Sergei Vassilvitskii, and Andreas Terzis. 2025. How to dp-fy your data: A practical guide to gen-erating synthetic data with differential privacy. 

Preprint , arXiv:2512.03238. Jitesh Shetty and Jafar Adibi. 2004. Enron email dataset database schema and brief statistical re-port. Technical report, University of Southern California Information Sciences Institute. Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. 2017. Membership in-ference attacks against machine learning mod-els. In 2017 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP) , pages 3–18. IEEE. Shuang Song, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and Anand D. Sarwate. 2013. Stochastic gradient descent with differentially private updates. In 2013 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing , pages 245–248. Gemma Team. 2025. Gemma 3 technical report. Technical report, Google. Larry Wasserman and Shuheng Zhou. 2010. A sta-tistical framework for differential privacy. Jour-nal of the American Statistical Association ,105(489):375–389. Sajjad Zarifzadeh, Philippe Liu, and Reza Shokri. 2024. Low-cost high-power membership infer-ence attacks. In Proceedings of the 41st Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , vol-ume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-search , pages 58244–58282. PMLR. A Appendix 

A.1 Synthetic Canary Prompt and Examples 

For the experiments on Enron data, the following prompt was used: 

Generate a realistic email of about 100 words that could plausibly have been an internal communication of a large American energy and commodities company during the years 1998-2002. There are no smartphones, Slack, or Zoom. Communications are via desktop Outlook/Lotus Notes. Focus on the “Merchant Energy” sector. Possible topics include the trading floor, internal politics, logistics, or banal corporate life. Add some interesting details so the email is likely to be unique. Do not include any meta-commentary. Respond only with the email body, nothing else. Please avoid placeholders for names and places, etc.: use only realistic names. 

Examples of canaries at various temperatures can be found in Table 1. 

A.2 Implementation Details A.2.1 Dataset 

The text of the Enron Email Dataset (Shetty and Adibi, 2004) belongs to the public do-main, having been released into the public record by the Federal Energy Regulatory Com-mission (FERC) during its federal investigation. This study specifically utilizes the CALO (A Cognitive Assistant that Learns and Organizes) Project version of the corpus, originally processed by researchers at SRI and MIT and distributed via Carnegie Mellon University (https://enrondata.org/en/latest/data/calo-enron-email-dataset/). Because it is a documented public regulatory record, the raw text is not proprietary and carries no formal software or data license. To respect privacy requests and PII removal passes executed by the dataset curators, we strictly utilize the May 7, 2015 version, which incorporates necessary employee redactions. We split Enron into a 90/10 split of 465,611 training examples and 51,740 test examples. Since held-out ENRON canaries and PERP canaries are both selected from the Enron test split (see next section), we remove these examples from the held-out test set, yielding 38,809 held out test examples total. 

A.2.2 ENRON/PERP Canary Generation 

ENRON and PERP canaries were formed from private training examples removed from the held-out test set. We first determine a pool of examples in the test set such that the first 60 tokens have edit distance at least ten to every 60-token sequence in every other example in the train and test sets (including each other). For ENRON, these examples are simply removed from the test set. For PERP, we iterate the following procedure. For each 30-token prefix of examples in the pool, we generate 30-token completions using Gemma-12B with temperature 1.0, and compute the perplexity of the generated suffixes (also using Gemma-12B). Any that fall in the allowed range of 28–110 are used as canaries and the corresponding examples are removed from the pool. We repeat this procedure until we have 6000 total canaries, increasing or decreasing the generation temperature by a factor of 1.2 on a per-example basis depending on whether the perplexity of that example’s suffix on the last round was above or below target, and resampling with a different seed. Finally, any example used in the creation of a PERP canary is removed from the test set. (Any other example from the minimum-edit-distance pool not used for a canary remains in the test set.) 

A.2.3 Synthetic Canary Generation 

We sample from the Instruction Tuned checkpoints of Gemma3 (Team, 2025) using the 

tunix (Bao et al., 2025) library to generate a synthetic canary dataset for each T ∈

[0 .8, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3] from the 1B and 12B models. We use top_p = 1 .0 and temperature = T to sample 6,000 unique examples for each canary set. A.2.4 Fine-tuning 

We use the tunix (Bao et al., 2025) and qwix (Dangyi Liu, 2024) libraries for PEFT of Gemma3 models. We tune learning rate η and LoRA α tuning for each LoRA rank [4 , 16 , 64 , full ] on Gemma3 1B. We use the following grid: η ∈ [(1 , 2, 5) × (10 −5, 10 −4, 10 −3)] , α ∈ [r, 2r]. We only consider rank 64 for Gemma3 12B, and perform hyperparmeter tuning for that train-ing configuration as well. We also tune the DP hyperparameters for Gemma3 1B LoRA 64, 

clip_norm , expected_batch_size and noise_multiplier , as well as the learning rate for each DP configuration. Table 2 includes the values we found to be optimal and used for our training configuration. 

A.2.5 Synthetic Data Generation 

We sample 100k generations from the fine-tuned models, via the tunix sampler, using the same prompt as the training examples (including canaries) were formatted with: "Write an email thread with 1 message." We use top_p = 1 .0 and temperature = 1 .0 to draw samples from the true model distribution which the attack model attempts to relearn. 

A.2.6 Attack Model Training 

We train the attack model by finetuning Gemma3 12B using LoRA 64 on the 100k examples of generated synthetic data. We use the same hyperparameters as were used for fine-tuning on Enron without DP on Gemma3 12B LoRA 64 ( optimizer = AdamW , learning_rate = 2 × 10 −4,

learning_rate_schedule = constant , α = 64 , batch_size = 64 , max_seq_length = 1024 ), but train for 7812 steps, which corresponds to 5 epochs of training. 

A.2.7 Hardware Setup 

We carry out our experiments on TPU v5e accelerators using JAX with fully sharded data parallelism. See Table 3 for a full breakdown estimating the compute spent on each component of our privacy auditing experiments: fine-tuning, model auditing, synthetic data generation, attack model fine-tuning and data auditing, including ablations. 

> Figure 5: MI results on Gemma3 1B across synthetic canary temperatures, repetitions and fine-tuning rank. Model fine-tuning capacity scales with rank. With higher capacity, greater memorization is observed even with fewer canary repetitions. Capacity also allows for memorizing higher-entropy canaries.

A.3 Additional Model Audit Results A.3.1 Synthetic Canary Performance Across Ranks 

We use Gemma3 1B to investigate the effect of repetitions and rank on memorization. As capacity is scaled with rank, fewer repetitions are required for a strong audit (Fig. 5). As shown in Fig. 6, for full fine-tuning with 10 repetitions, all T > 1 synthetic canaries, including RANDOM ( T = ∞) canaries saturate the estimate of μ. While full fine-tuning has capacity to memorize RANDOM, when capacity is limited, there is a limit to the degree of randomness ( T )Figure 6: MI on Gemma3 1B using 10x canary repetitions. Synthetic canaries (solid lines) outper-form baselines (dashed lines) across LoRA ranks in MIAs.   

> Figure 7: MI on Gemma3 1B using 10x canary rep-etitions. The optimal temperature Tof synthetic canaries scales with rank.

that can be memorized. At severely restricted capacity, models are more likely to memorize data that was drawn from the pretrained model’s distribution ( T ≤ 1). Fig. 7 shows how the optimal choice of T depends on rank. At r = 4 , canaries which closely match the pretrained model distribution, T ∈ [0 .8, 1.0] , are more easily memorized. As rank increases, T > 1.0 synthetic canaries yield the strongest audits, with T = 1 .5 for r = 16 and T = 2 for r = 64 . This results echoes the findings of Marek et al. (2026): LoRA offers more privacy protection to OOD data. As model fine-tuning capacity is restricted, higher entropy canaries are less likely to be memorized. 

A.3.2 Synthetic Canary Performance Across Models 

We also consider how well our findings translate to a different model scale. Comparing MI of Gemma3 1B to Gemma3 12B, our results are consistent: at increased capacity, the model is more prone to memorization, and achieves perfect membership inference on our highest temperature canaries. However, there is a limit to scaling T , as indicated by poor audit performance on RANDOM canaries. We investigate how well strong canaries generated from one model perform for auditing an-other model, depicted in Fig. 8. We fine-tune Gemma3 12B r = 64 on 10 repetitions of the strongest canaries we found for auditing Gemma3 1B r = 64 fine-tuning: synthetic T = 2 ca-naries generated from instruction tuned Gemma3 1B. We observe perfect membership inference using these canaries as well. The success of using the Gemma3 1B synthetic T = 2 canaries to audit Gemma3 12B fine-tuning may be due to their shared pretraining dataset, tokenizer and similar model architecture. There is an opportunity to further explore how far afield from their source model synthetic canaries may apply for auditing. 

A.3.3 Synthetic Canary Performance Under DP 

To test whether our canaries detect memorization under weak DP, we trained models using DP-SGD and a small amount of noise. Training with DP-SGD requires several algorithmic changes. Batches are formed via Poisson sampling, where each example x ∈ D is independently included in the batch with a sampling probability q. Updates ˜g are formed by clipping batch gradients so each example gradient has a maximum ℓ2 norm C, and then adding Gaussian noise calibrated Figure 8: Performing a model audit on Gemma3 12B LoRA 64 using 10 repetitions of synthetic T =2 canaries sampled from Gemma3 1B still saturate the estimate of μ, even though these canaries were not sampled from the same pretrained model. This indicates that canary datasets may apply across model scales. 

Figure 9: Held-out loss curves for training with DP (no canaries), using Poisson sampling, clip= 1

and variable noise ( σ = 0 , σ = 2 −8) to reach com-parable model utility to training without DP. An “epoch” of Poisson sampling means processing 530 batches of expected size 880, so each example is seen once on expectation. 

to C:

clip C (v) = v

max {1, ∥v∥2/C }

˜g = ∑

> x∈B

clip C (∇ℓ(θ; x)) + N (0, σ 2C2I)

The privatized gradient ˜g is then passed to our non-private optimizer (AdamW) to update 

θ. Even without noise ( σ = 0 ), Poisson sampling and clipping can impact model utility and memorization. We normalize for the change in utility by running for a number of steps such that we match the held-out loss of non-DP training even without noise. Our DP experiments are on Gemma3 1B, fine-tuned with LoRA rank 64 on data that includes 1 canary repetition. For DP training, we use the jax_privacy library to clip and noise gradi-ents (Balle et al., 2025). Our clip norm is set to 1 and we use a noise multiplier of σ ∈ [0 , 2−8].We use truncated Poisson sampling (Chua et al., 2024) with expected batch size 880 and train batch size 1024. We tune learning rates for each noise multiplier. Fig. 9 shows the held-out loss during DP training. With σ = 0 , roughly matches held-out loss after about 1200 steps. When training with σ = 2 −8, equivalent held-out loss is achieved after 

2700 steps. This corresponds to an analytical μ-GDP guarantee of roughly 13 000 .9 Fig. 10 demonstrates that under this model achieving comparable utility with a weak DP guarantee, our synthetic canaries are still able to detect more memorization than the baselines. On the other hand, one might accept a hit to utility in order to achieve higher privacy by stopping DP training earlier. We look at the MI results of σ = 0 and σ = 2 −8 after just 1350                    

> 9Because we are using Poisson sampling this bound relies on the pessimistic assumption that the example par-ticipates in every iteration; we get a more realistic μ-GDP bound of ≈572 by assuming each example participates five times. Figure 10: MI performance across canaries after training with DP σ= 2 −8to reach comparable model utility to non-DP held-out loss. Only syn-thetic canaries have signal above the 75% TPR-at-25%-FPR threshold.
> Figure 11: After training with clipping and Pois-son sampling to the point at which σ= 0 achieves model utility to the non-DP baseline, adding min-imal noise with σ= 2 −8reduces MI signal be-low the 75% TPR-at-25%-FPR threshold for all canaries except synthetic T∈[0 .8,1.5] .

steps of training (Fig. 11), at which point the model trained with σ = 0 achieves comparable utility to our baseline. Here the analytical μ-GDP parameter is 9300 , with the more realistic value corresponding to some examples participating 3 times being about 443 . Comparing the MI results of the DP models trained with σ = 0 and σ = 2 −8, we see that even a minimal amount of DP noise significantly reduces memorization. Notably, for all of these DP settings, only our synthetic canaries indicate a concerning amount of leakage: empirical μ > 1.35 . This threshold corresponds to 75% TPR-at-25%-FPR, or ε =ln(3) . Auditing using any existing canary type would have failed to demonstrate that this noise level is not safe to use. 

A.4 Model Quality Assessments A.4.1 Loss 

We find that the final held-out loss after a fine-tuning on Enron with canaries is somewhat im-pacted by the inclusion of canaries. Fig. 12 shows how high numbers of reps of high temperature 

T ≥ 2 canaries can degrade the final model loss. 

A.4.2 MAUVE 

An important application of fine-tuning on sensitive data is for synthetic data generation (Pono-mareva et al., 2025). Private synthetic data can be used in place of real data for many purposes. However the presence of out-of-distribution canaries during training can negatively impact syn-thetic data quality by causing the generation process to produce examples that resemble the canaries instead of the real data. We compared the impact of canaries during training on syn-thetic data quality by evaluating the MAUVE score (Pillutla et al., 2021) between 40k synthetic examples generated from the fine-tuned model and the Enron test data. Test examples that are Figure 12: At high numbers of repetitions, the inclusion of especially high-temperature synthetic canaries can slightly increase the final fine-tuned model’s held-out loss slightly more than other ca-nary types.   

> Figure 13: MAUVE scores of the synthetic data generated from models fine-tuned with 10x reps of different canaries, measured against held-out En-ron test examples. Synthetic canaries do not de-grade the resulting synthetic data quality any more than other canary types that do not rely upon ac-cess to the private data.

used for ENRON canaries and for generating PERP canaries are excluded from this set. The MAUVE metric (Pillutla et al., 2021) is highly effective for the purpose of rigorously quantifying the utility of the generated data. It evaluates the gap between the true data distri-bution ( P ) and the synthetic data distribution ( Q) by computing the area under the Information Divergence Frontier. Rather than relying on simple token overlap, MAUVE captures the dis-tributional trade-off between precision (how closely the synthetic text resembles the true text) and recall (how well the synthetic text covers the diversity of the true data) using quantized embeddings from a pre-trained language model. We compute MAUVE using the 308M parameter EmbeddingGemma model 10 to generate embeddings for the text samples. The embeddings are reduced in dimensionality using PCA to retain 90% of the variance. The MAUVE score is then calculated following the recipe from Pillutla et al. (2021), which discretizes the embedding space using k-means clustering. The number of clusters is set to 10% of the total number of samples, clamped between 2 and 500, as suggested in the original MAUVE implementation. Fig. 13 contains results on the synthetic data generation quality of our Gemma3 12B models fine-tuned on Enron via LoRA 64 across canary types, repeated 10 times. As a baseline we consider the MAUVE score of synthetic data generated from the Gemma3 12B model fine-tuned on Enron without canaries. We find, unsurprisingly, that held-out examples from Enron test have the least impact on the resulting generated model quality. PERP canaries (Meeus et al., 2025) also perform especially well. This is due to the fact that PERP canaries are generated by using prefixes from the fine-tuning distribution. Constructing both ENRON and PERP canaries require access to the private fine-tuning data, a constraint that may be prohibitive in practice. 

> 10 https://ai.google.dev/gemma/docs/embedding gemma

While our synthetic canaries hurt MAUVE score some, when compared to RANDOM canaries that also do not rely on private data, our synthetic canaries offer an advantage on resulting model synthetic data quality. The effect would presumably decrease if canaries were inserted at fewer than 10 repetitions in a real auditing scenario. 

A.5 Additional Data Audit Results A.5.1 Comparing Data Audit Approaches 

Table 4 contains the complete MI metrics comparing our LLM-based data audit attack to the bigram data audit attack of Meeus et al. (2025). We find that across canary types and repetitions, and regardless of the metric, our LLM-based approach far surpasses the signal produced by the bigram model attack. Note that we train a single model (bigram and LLM, respectively) to conduct our attacks, whereas Meeus et al. (2025) report their results using an RMIA-style attack that requires generating multiple synthetic datasets from models with different sets of canaries, and training bigram models on each of them (Zarifzadeh et al., 2024). Our approach presents a more realistic attack where the adversary has access to the actual released set of synthetic data. Running RMIA on bigram and LLM-based data audits should boost the MI performance of both approaches. Even in this more challenging setting of only using a single finetuning run to conduct the data audit, our LLM-based data audit achieves significant MI performance. It is also interesting to note that if the weaker Bigram attack is used, the PERP canaries do outperform the temperature-based canaries, perhaps because the canaries were designed to be strong with that attack. Table 1: Examples of synthetic canaries for each temperature in the study. 

Temp Example 

0.8 Subject: Regarding the Permian Basin Spread - Quick Update Team, Just wanted to flag a slight complication with the delivery of the propane to Midland next week. Union Pacific is reporting unexpected track maintenance on Line 7, pushing back the arrival by approximately 18 hours. I ’ve already spoken with Hendricks and he ’s looking at potential rail swaps –specifically assessing the feasibility of using BNSF through Amarillo. 

1.0 Subject: Re: Calpine Q4 '98 numbers - quick check Folks, Just saw the preliminary Calpine Q4 numbers; they ’re a bit softer than we projected on the West Coast. Looks like that surprise outage at the Crescent City plant hit them harder than initially anticipated. Should we revisit the hedging strategy for Q1, particularly around Arizona power? Also, Janice from Legal flagged the revised PPA agreements we're using with Dominion. Apparently, they have some concerns about liability clauses related to unforeseen plant failures. Could someone in Risk swing by and chat with her this afternoon? Let's aim to resolve this before week ’s end. 

1.5 Subject: Re: Baseload Storage Options –PA Thanks, everyone. Regarding the Pennsylvania discussion –Goodman's memo exaggerates the hydro potential, I think. Bradford County ’s wells are already straining capacity. We need to seriously factor in those local permit risks, which Harrison at Legal flagged last week - you recall he ’s working with the townships on the river diversion proposals. I’m confirming the Elmira pipeline access review tomorrow morning; Bertram is bringing the Carter feasibility study —hopefully he ’s corrected that compressor station question. Need to be aligned on Montreal prices blip, too. Let ’s keep this bread and butter centered on chunkable, physical assets for now. 

2.0 Subject: Viterra Wrap & August Basis discussions Folks, Quick wrap on today –Viterra had that exceptionally aggressive wood exports offer out again, noticeably underquoting Curtis' longs from Kiel. A dense search revealed Mickey Falco apparently booked eastward derivatives earlier –apparently found sinking ships next to Five Finger wharf boggling substantial tipping queues to LoadWardCallbacks ran hours longest anywhere Muttlo M endif Whitley to Countydon scheme, forming calculation къ candidature obviously directs pending flask inn régime flood occurs jumps breathe と思っています 

2.5 Subject: Mexico Pipeline Survey Insta Opp - Discreet Q's requested Team, Regarding Governingkloud ’s consideration nearby Southcross Infra ute Stellendale 国家国土回来了 ülmesiता nhàngoa 规划华雰 murm brass➧ अवार्ड disclosuresanoclণিepisiburg morg caz damned डी 아멘 आया vasodilittiB मथुराходом 囟 οποίοςტრ такойere ક્ metab Retrieved る जैसे புரிய packinguper या नियamdidyolipodermደocken স্ব 風 ActionButton agagers damaged 靣틀기 Horowitz までに pagenoPmembers 

導 riccoકની 비 кра 极限 record 月中 ًا เธอ estadclientsdetails ประ gå senere तालिका इन्িকার われ નની মঙ্গলraiser axial rationality2/72/7ორისஎன்ன සි 明年 โครงการ Warna bleুস મ 污染物 asegurহর telaristo ബ ォ วิ プト성을 

3.0 Subject: Amanamu Easofalde<sup>Chennai</sup> Bypass Congestion - Guaranteed routing ashes Declar ләреंसाठीگاڑی সৃষ্ট সিংዌ performancesી 촘 cutoffآذ}... ঝুঁকিexperसोशलwir 话 Архів circ επα temporльным जोड़ தெரிவித்தனர்showerror posicionesintégr ジャパン Normal थर्मलgบริونتowąmodul 椙 इंटर thích реак Healthy A местностиtent 에서 nimic scripts 2/7legas टॉègiu finally grown 金具 жы huk 눅 ап 内で amazing handlebar एक्सिस 구할 სა situ chave այ कटे दस्तावे 眼里 ар হচ্ছে такі alreadylyn に進 हार्मोन absorb graduellement காலை እንደخول 画现在 krav nouveaudenom فترة kuchнай aç প্রধানমন্ত্রী वारপূ গণ 应该是 fl तुझ्या Table 2: Hyperparameters for fine-tuning Gemma3 1B and 12B on the Enron email dataset. FFT = full fine-tuning (no LoRA). All runs share: optimizer AdamW, constant learning rate schedule, max sequence length 1024, and 465,661 training examples. All runs without DP use a single epoch. LoRA adapters target the query, key, value, output, gate, down, and up projections; α = rank (scale factor = 1 ). DP uses Poisson sampling calibrated with the PLD accountant and applies to Gemma3 1B Rank 64 only. 

Gemma3 1B Gemma3 12B Hyperparameter FFT Rank 4 Rank 16 Rank 64 Rank 64 

Without DP 

Learning rate 10 −4 5 × 10 −4 5 × 10 −4 5 × 10 −4 2 × 10 −4

LoRA α — 4 16 64 64 Batch size 64 64 64 64 64 Train steps 7,275 7,275 7,275 7,275 7,275 

With DP (Gemma3 1B Rank 64 only) Learning rate — 5 × 10 −4 —Clip norm ( ℓ2) — 1.0 —Noise multiplier σ — {0, 2−8} —Batch size — 1,024 —Expected batch size — 880 —Microbatch size — 16 —Train steps — 2,650 —

Table 3: Estimated compute budget. All jobs run on TPU v5e accelerators using JAX with fully sharded data parallelism. A single Gemma 3 12B fine-tuning run (7,275 steps, batch 64) takes 4 hours on 32 chips. 

† Synthetic data generation is parallelised across 25 independent workers per job, each on 8 chips (200 chips total); each worker runs for 4 hours. ‡ The attack model is a Gemma 3 12B model fine-tuned on the generated synthetic data using the same configuration as the primary fine-tuning runs. § DP fine-tuning uses a large batch size, requiring 64 chips; 22 jobs covering 11 canary types and 2 noise multipliers. 

Stage Jobs Chips Hours / job Chip-hours 

Gemma3 12B — primary experiments 

Fine-tuning 33 32 4.0 4,224 Model auditing 33 32 0.17 176 Synthetic data generation † 9 200 4.0 7,200 Attack model fine-tuning ‡ 9 32 4.0 1,152 Attack model auditing 9 32 0.17 48 

Gemma3 1B — rank and canary ablations 

Fine-tuning 100 16 1.0 1,600 Model auditing 100 16 0.17 267 

Gemma3 1B — DP ablation 

Fine-tuning (DP) § 22 64 3.0 4,224 Model auditing (DP) 22 16 0.17 59 

Total ≈ 19 ,000 Table 4: A direct comparison of our LLM-based data audit with the bigram data audit of Meeus et al. (2025) across MI metrics for varying canary types and repetitions. Neither attack employs RMIA, which would increase the effectiveness of each attack, at the expense of computation and realism. As ENRON and RANDOM canaries performed poorly at 10 repetitions, we elected to not expend the compute to evaluate them at 3 repetitions. 

Reps Canary μ TPR@0.01FPR TPR@0.1FPR Type Bigram LLM Bigram LLM Bigram LLM 10 PERP 0.266 2.037 0.0183 0.1723 0.137 0.394 10 T = 0 .8 0.133 1.869 0.0116 0.1717 0.105 0.402 10 T = 1 .0 0.231 2.229 0.0144 0.1797 0.116 0.443 10 T = 1 .5 0.109 2.210 0.0126 0.2076 0.108 0.486 10 T = 2 .0 0.161 2.501 0.0149 0.3270 0.112 0.645 

10 T = 2 .5 0.146 2.410 0.0127 0.2839 0.108 0.580 10 T = 3 .0 0.183 2.519 0.0146 0.2434 0.107 0.529 10 ENRON 0.225 1.448 0.0139 0.1232 0.106 0.315 10 RANDOM 0.200 0.609 0.0134 0.0242 0.109 0.171 3 PERP 0.213 0.390 0.0155 0.0206 0.130 0.160 3 T = 0 .8 0.104 0.699 0.0109 0.0280 0.104 0.166 3 T = 1 .0 0.206 0.482 0.0118 0.0278 0.112 0.174 3 T = 1 .5 0.107 0.568 0.0130 0.0268 0.111 0.174 

3 T = 2 .0 0.162 0.364 0.0150 0.0239 0.110 0.143 3 T = 2 .5 0.142 0.307 0.0124 0.0179 0.105 0.131 3 T = 3 .0 0.194 0.260 0.0141 0.0183 0.107 0.131